
Everyone is dressed in lavish apparel—bright robes and muted shawls and patterned tunics and bejeweled cowls. Mer feels the fabrics against her arms and face as she brushes by people, and she wrinkles her nose at the powdery and musty and dry and wet scents coming off their clothes in little puffs of cool air, and she stops and rises up on her toes every so often to peek over the countless heads and get another glimpse of her knight in blue armor as he drifts ever further away in this sea.
There’s a winding staircase in one corner of the roof that leads down to the lower floors, and she watches as he trots down them and disappears from sight.
When she finally breaks free of that shifting mass of bodies and finds herself at the stairs, she descends them to the second landing where the double doors are swung open already. The room inside is huge—a dining hall with many long, candle-lit tables like it belongs to some ancient-era party caterer. Women in biltas and cowls walk in and out of the kitchen carrying dishes, which they line up on the tables. For one split second, she’s tempted to call out and ask if they’ve seen the blue guardsman, but fear of what they might ask in return silences her.
So instead she turns her attention to an open door in the wall far to her right. When she looks at the women again, one of them is watching her, mouth slightly open as if about to say something. Mer hurries to the doorway. It’s not the fear of them asking who she is that bothers her, but the fear of them asking who he is.
Just as she’s taking her first few steps into the hall, a hand reaches out and clenches her wrist, while another comes around behind her head and covers her mouth.
“Mmmf!” she cries into the big hand as she’s pulled back. Someone had been standing in the corner where the two walls meet, just out of sight for anyone in the room.
She falls back into her captor’s body, and just as she’s about to struggle, she feels his breath against her ear and hears, “Shhhhh. Just let it happen.”
Then the hands let go, and she jerks away and turns around to see the blue guard standing there, showing her a big grin behind his helmet.
“Goddamn you!” she hisses through clenched teeth. “I hate that so much!”
He holds his fist up to his mouth and squeezes his eyes shut and titters quietly like a monkey.
Her cheeks warm. One of the many benefits of darker skin is that it hides the fact that you’re blushing.
“Shut up,” she commands him, but he’s looking away now, hiding his face. “Shut up!” she says again, a lot louder. Then she throws her hands over her mouth and peeks past him into the dining hall. Now a couple maids are staring at what must to them look like a madwoman scolding herself, her brow furrowed and her fists balled up and her curly locks splayed against her forehead like ink. Mer smears the hair away from her face with the back of her knuckles, and then after an awkward stare that lasts a few seconds longer than she can stand, she raises a hand and waves at them, grinning. The maids look at each other as if to check which among them has the authority to question this woman, and then perhaps finding that the answer is none of them they one-by-one turn and head for the kitchen door.
“We have to go somewhere else to talk,” Mer hisses at the guard when the women look away. He plants his back to the wall and tries to peek his head past the doorway like a spy checking a room for enemies. “Come on, you moron!” she says, and then she grabs his wrist and pulls him down the hall like a mother reprimanding her child.
The hall ends abruptly and splits off left and right. At this crossroads, the guard pulls his hand away and says, “Wait, wait, wait.”
“What?” she whispers back.
“I don’t think anyone’s around.”
She shrugs. “So?”
“So come here.” He grabs her arm and pulls her down one hall, where they won’t be seen from the doorway, and then with his other hand he lifts his helmet off. Fair skin and short, dandelion hair, and a five o-clock shadow as rough as hay, and a sharpened, hard jawline, and a rounded, soft nose, and a bright, perfect smile that seems to spark a light behind his cerulean eyes. His helmet clanks out a hollow, metallic sound that rings down the hall when he drops it, and he puts his hand behind her head and leans down to kiss her lips.
Her first instinct is to resist—to put a hand against his chest and push him away—but then he lets go of her arm and cups that hand under her chin, and now he is exhaling into her mouth. Warm breath. Sweet taste. Her elbows sink, and she caves against him.
It’s been too long. Far too long.
When he pulls away, she just looks at him. “Erv…” she says quietly.
“The Patriarch says we’re on in a week.”
Her eyes widen. “What?”
“The plan,” he says, his voice rising with excitement. “It’s happening.” Mer stares in his eyes. “We’re getting Tab, and we’re getting Cart.” He grabs her shoulders. “And we’re getting Roth.” She shakes her head. “And we’re getting off this goddamn rock.”
Mer throws her arms around his neck and hugs him, and he puts his arms around her waist and lifts her off her feet.
“Thank god,” she says when he sets her back down. But her smile soon fades, and her look of joy is replaced with one of guilt. “But what are we gonna do with Roth?” she asks.
Erv’s smile fades too, but not so much that he looks unhappy. “That’s something I wanted to talk to you about. Come on.”
She pauses for a moment, watching him. Clad in his decorated armor and walking slowly down these old, ostentatious halls, he looks like a hero of an era long lost to history. She touches her lips. She licks them. It’s been too long.
Three years on this planet hunting down Nairoth. Three years that formed up like a stone wall between them.
After a few more moments of thought, Mer follows after him, calling out for him to slow the hell down.
Together, they travel the halls like children lost in a fancy hotel, peeking into rooms playfully and playing rock paper scissors whenever they disagree about which way to go at intersections. And though it’s all very reminiscent of the old days, Mer doesn’t ignore the fact that he won’t reach out to hold her hand. She guesses that some things can’t change in a day.
“So what was it you wanted to tell me?” she asks, standing behind him as he pushes open a door and slips his head in to look around.
“Holy shit,” he says. He glances back and gestures for her to follow before pushing the door all the way through and creeping inside. They find a vast room filled with racks of fancy clothing like a royal discount store. Shirts and pants hang so low that she’d have to bend down to get them, and so high that she’d need to stand on Erv’s shoulders, even using the hooked stick that leans on the wall. Erv grabs something from one of the racks.
“Wanna play dress-up?” he asks.
Against her better judgment, she laughs, shaking her head. “I want to talk about what we should be talking about.”
He makes a show of sighing disappointedly and says, “Fine.” He drops the dress, and they leave that room. As they walk the halls again, Erv speaks without looking at her. “Tab and Cart have taken the bait.”
“A free trip to the capital to see the king.” Mer watches the floor. “They wanna go so bad they’d take this big a risk?”
“They call the king ‘The Oracle’ here—don’t forget.” He wags his finger at her playfully. “And I dunno,” he shrugs, “I guess Roth is really pushing them to leave. He must realize we’re here.”
“You think he’s just going to infect the Oracle with his spores?”
“Seems like the only explanation. The crazy thing is, they specifically asked to ride in a single carriage with just the one driver to go with them. Maybe Tab doesn’t think she needs protection.”
“Yeah, and maybe she’s right.”
Erv shakes his head. “The Patriarch will put together a nice, secure carriage. Cart, Tab and Roth will climb in willingly. The doors will lock. We’ll pull out our guns. Then—”
“Then we ride into the sunset,” she says.
He smiles at her.
“Assuming they have no quantum affinities.”
He shrugs. “If they do, the direct approach is far more dangerous.”
They hang a left and find themselves in an ugly hallway. The rooms have no doors, and when they peek inside they see no windows. Darkness. The maids’ quarters most likely. Leave it to the Patriarch to cut costs in places that’ll be used more often than seen.
“It’s lucky Ank came around when he did,” she says. “Otherwise we’d have never known Cart and Tab were Detached. It’s terrifying just thinking about it.”
Erv nods. “I just wish we could… get them right now, you know?” He is looking up at the ceiling as he walks, one hand against his sword hilt.
“Well, we can’t.” She takes him by the arm, and he looks at her.
“I know. Roth has too many people in the other town. If we attacked him now, they would know it immediately. And who knows what they’d do in response.”
She nods slowly.
“They’d probably scatter,” Erv goes on. “And then we’d have to burn the whole city.”
Mer doesn’t speak.
At the end of the hallway they find two sets of stairs. One descends into a shaded hall, and the other rises and stops halfway to meet a landing where there’s only a window and a potted plant on a wooden stand, and then it continues up to the next floor.
“Up or down?” Erv asks her.
The hall at the end of the descending stairwell is haunted by the dim light of fading lanterns. No window light to be seen. Their flames cast horrid shadows against the floor—phantom decorations hanging from the ceiling, and black shapes of flowers leaning out of vases like people resting their elbows on the edge of a swimming pool. These dark counterimages are large and angled wrongly and elongated. It doesn’t matter whether she and Erv go down or up, and yet a strange feeling stirs inside her when she considers descending.
“Up,” she finally says.
Erv nods.
“And you’ve said it before, but,” he continues as they ascend to the light, “Tab isn’t likely to go down easily.”
Mer lets that sit before saying: “No she isn’t. And Ank wouldn’t let us hurt her anyway.”
“Ank would try to kill us if we even came close,” Erv agrees.