
Two Weeks Ago

Ank proved to be a strange specimen from the first moment they met him.
It was only a couple weeks earlier, late in the night. Mer and Erv shared a room in the Patriarch’s palace, though Mer had the bed to herself, and Erv’s pillows and comforters were balled up on the floor.
That night she sat up in the bed as Erv filled the silence by doing push-ups, too restless to close his eyes. She had pulled her knees against herself as she waited for sleep to come, staring blankly past them down at her toes. Three years of toil had made them this way. Three years of serving their duties as Watchers in this strange universe—of cleansing the population of an alien disease called Nairoth. Their mission had been so thoroughly successful that they had whittled the infected population down to a city called Corver, but an argument over what to do next kept things from progressing any further.
Should they bring the disease back alive, a specimen to be studied by the Watchers? Or should they wipe him out so that another outbreak couldn't happen again? “We’ll wipe him out,” Erv had said to her. “We’ll just burn the town, and we’ll finally go home.” But Roth is more than just a disease—he’s an entire living species. To kill him would be genocide.
So how could they kill him?
There were other reasons she didn't want to do it, but that was the logic she gave Erv.
So they sat there in silence, Mer replaying faded memories of friends in other universes in her mind like tragic movies, and Erv rising and falling, huffing heavily below her.
Then they heard a knock.
It was a dull sound, like knuckles rapping against glass. At first she glanced at the door, expecting someone to walk in, but then the sound came again and she looked toward the balcony. It had a sliding glass door with curtains pulled over it.
“A bird?” she said to herself thoughtfully.
“I hate birds,” Erv grumbled.
“Why?”
“They freak me out.”
She rolled her eyes at this subtle attempt at humor. “Everything freaks you out,” she said.
She threw her legs over the edge of the bed and stood, and as she went past him, Erv said, “Like your face.” It was a very sudden joke—a flash of his old personality—but she wasn’t particularly in the mood to laugh.
At the balcony door, she pulled back the curtain slightly. Folded up against the glass was a pale fist, almost yellowish and square and wide and bony. She squealed like a chipmunk and jumped back and pulled the curtain as she did, and it fell away horribly and revealed the rest of what she had seen: A hand connected to an arm hidden in a sleeve. A tall, grim-looking man was standing there in a ragged gray bilta covered in lint. His eyes seemed too big for their sockets, and his high cheekbones gave his face a starved look that didn’t match his sturdy upper body. His forehead was too big, and his head was shaved so that only a dark trace of hair remained.
This time she really screamed, balling her hands into fists and raising them a little as if she was summoning the strength from within her.
The intruder threw his hands up like a man being robbed and took a couple steps back. Their eyes met, and she saw in those irises darkness beyond all imagining.
He smiled.
She screamed.
His eyes widened, and he stumbled back and fell onto his ass.
That’s when Erv pushed her aside and slid open the door. “What the fuck!” he shouted as he rushed the man, taking him by the collar of his bilta. Just as he raised his fist to strike, the man spoke.
“Wait,” he said in a forceful tone, though he wasn’t quite raising his voice.
Erv started to speak, but then the man reached into the neck of his bilta and pulled out a medallion hanging from a chain around his neck. It was an eye with three concentric rings where the pupil would be, one big, one small, and one smaller.
After a few silent moments, Erv released his grip on the man’s collar. “What the hell are you sneaking around like that for?”
The man got up on his elbows and looked at Erv. “See without being seen,” he said in a grizzly voice. An old phrase the Watchers used often.
“Well, you were seen.” Erv looked at Mer.
“I’m alright,” she said. “He just… spooked me a little.”
Once they let him in, Ank would explain that he was a Watcher like them—an agent sent into this universe on a top-secret mission. While they were there to wipe out the sentient disease that was spreading across this kingdom, he was there to track an extremely dangerous Detached named Tab, who had arrived in this universe to help the sentient disease. She was teaming up with Nairoth.
“She’s in this city right now,” Ank said. They were in the room by then, and they had closed the balcony door against the cold. “She’s posing as a foreign diplomat with another Detached and two of Roth’s nodes.”
“Two?” Erv scrunched his brow up. “How the hell did two escape?”
“Tab and her friend rode into Corver posing as foreigners, and when they left they smuggled him out. They got out by pretending to be foreign friends of the Patriarch.”
“Those white kids that came last week,” Erv said.
“What’s Tab’s affinity?” Mer asked.
Ank paused for a moment and cupped his hands together at his lower back and said, “Aberration.”
Mer felt her stomach churn. “Oh my god,” she whispered.
People like Ank and Mer and Erv are people whose native universes have died. When that happens, usually every living being within the universe dies as well, but sometimes a single person can survive. From that moment on, the person is able to travel from one universe to the next, never becoming permanently attached to any single one—these people are called Detached.
Sometimes these Detached end up with special abilities beyond being able to travel from one universe to another. The Watchers call these special abilities affinities, and there were once nine in total—eight unique affinities, and a final affinity that granted a person the ability to use all eight—but no one has been born with the ninth affinity in billions of years.
Until now.
Tab is a miracle of nature. An aberrant who can use any and all affinities. And yet something deeper than that stirred at the back of Mer’s mind. She had spent a decade searching for an aberrant, before she had even known Erv—and now one had fallen into her lap.
Erv exhaled through his nose. “What can she do?” he asked.
“I bet she can flood,” Mer muttered. “That’s a simple affinity.”
Erv nodded at Mer once, and then he looked at Ank. “Have you seen her burn anyone?” he asked.
“I’ve never seen her manipulate quantum energy,” Ank said. Every word he spoke was plain—every sentence efficient.
“Then how do you know she’s an aberrant?” Mer asked.
“I’m not at liberty to say.”
Erv was rolling his eyes and turning away before Ank had even finished. He threw his hands up. “Fucking Watcher politics,” he complained.
Mer’s whirling thoughts are all that kept her from doing the same. “Well goddammit,” she said. “Can you even tell us why she wants Nairoth?”
Ank shook his head.
“Why the hell not?”
“Because I don’t know,” he said. “No one knows.”