
Present Time

They are colossal, prehistoric beasts that watch the city from immeasurably high. The first one turns its head around the bend, and seen this way it could be mistaken for a serpent twisting its lanky body up from the red sand. Its eyes are great swimming pools of inky black, and the bystanders on the building ledges point and laugh when they see themselves reflected back in that wet darkness. The eyes pass. Then the neck, interminably long and dry and leathery. Then the body comes—a rotund, barreled torso and a long midsection resting on wrinkled brown legs like four inflated oak trees. A massive rack of steel beams hangs under its belly affixed to myriad spindly rods that angle up around its sides and meet three steel pegs that have been impaled cleanly through its body. And from atop these pegs another army of rods ascends, bent like spiderlegs, to another suspended rack of gleaming metal. It is upon this means of support that the wooden barge rests.
The barge is a rounded cube made from sunbleached rosewood that rises several storeys into the sky and doesn’t sway or dip or rise with the whiskle’s movements. There are balconies on the sides of the barge where passengers wave to the fanfare on the rooftops across the street like passengers on a cruise ship, and there are windows where people hang by the waist and toss candies and cakes bundled up in crinkly paper to children who nearly kill themselves leaning off ledges trying to catch them. People throw bouquets back and forth, and some throw jewelry, and a few throw bottles with messages inside that thud dully against the hull or fall short or shatter on impact, a thousand crystalline chunks tinkling to the smoothstone streets below like hail.
A whole herd of such beasts carrying such vehicles lumbers onward through the streets of this desert city, endless, tail to head, gone against the far horizon where the buildings look like hair follicles in the red hide of the planet.
There are flagpoles in the sides of the hulls—long banners of all colors swaying in what little wind comes. There are people on the roofs of the barges, watching at the guardrails the passing world before them: The sandstone rooftops where people run alongside, and where some of the crazier ones hop from one roof to the next; the maze of streets unfolding in the great stretching distance, dark lines between towers of steel with emerald glass cupping their circumferences on every floor so that the people inside can watch the people who watch them; the city wall, hundreds of feet high and still just barely past the height a whiskle can reach with its neck outstretched; and the rolling desert beyond, fixed in place like a clay sculpture of an ocean in the middle of a tempest, its dunes curled at their tops like waves and its little clumps of sand like eddies in a bubbling pool, and its lumpy hills and all its pits and divots and sharp declines.
Carter is one of those very spectators on the barge. He plants his sweaty palms against the gold railing and frowns and imagines it giving way under his weight. Paranoia.
“Was the Earth like this?” Velen asks from beside him. “I mean, before your universe died.”
Carter turns and leans his elbows back against the railing. The other barges on the other whiskles both ahead of and behind his seem much more lively.
Each barge is connected by rope bridges that totter precariously over the void between them and the ground, one bridge for each of the barge’s floors. There are children chasing each other across the bridges, clop of their sandals on the wooden planks playing through the air like horse hooves.
On one barge he sees a shirtless woman with dyed blue hair and a glass bowl of ink in her hands so that the people gathered around her can finger-paint messages onto her naked torso.
On another, far off in the distance and only just now rounding the corner, people make way for a man on stilts holding in each hand an emerald bowl in which orange flames burn wild and bright. The audience throws wads of paper and old hair ties and wristbands and gloves into these handheld pyres, and they all smile when their belongings twist like dying insects and blacken and burn.
These people are desertfolk—dark-skinned and curly-haired and hardened by their hard world. Some wear tunics that puff up in the wind, and some wear robes that pour like water, soft and colorful and rich and oozing, and some wear veils under their hoods like refugee brides sent on the run before they could say, “I do,” and some wear cowls over their heads like desert bandits, and some wear shawls that hide their arms, but most wear a bilta—the simple, full-body, hooded garment of the region.
Carter himself wears a white bilta, while Velen is dressed the same.
Taking in this alien place not like a tourist but like a time traveler learning the dire outcome of a small change he made in the past, Carter considers Velen’s question. Was Earth like this? And he turns to him. And he says: “No.”
Velen smiles.
He’s a man who hails from this very kingdom, someone skinny and dark with golden irises and a disproportionate mustache that falls like a canopy against his lip.
"I didn’t mean the weird things,” Velen says, waving his hand toward the procession of barges and all the madness that follows. “I meant the place in general. You know—an old-world lifestyle.”
Carter looks at him.
“Carriages drawn by animals. Men with swords—” he says this part with heroism in his voice, and with his chest pushed forward and his hand out with his palm up “—A simpler race of man not yet hobbled by an addiction to a life of convenience.” He looks at Carter with a smirk.
“No, we were hobbled alright,” Carter says, nodding.
“Mmm,” Velen hums. ”How old was your universe?”
Carter squints. “Fourteen billion?”
Velen sucks in a hissing breath. “That’s young. Very young.”
“That’s what they keep telling me.”
“But you like the Multiverse so far, no? If not, you will like it. There’s a lot more variety. If you ever get tired of living one life, poof, you pop up somewhere else, as someone else, and you start all over again.”
Carter sighs. “Yeah. They keep telling me that, too.”
Velen leans his own elbows back and spectates alongside Carter.
In the center of the roof are two painted statues of a man and a woman in white biltas standing back-to-back. The woman’s skin is brown, and her face is blank and featureless, and her hair is long and curly, and in her cupped, outheld hands a white bird peeks apprehensively at the world beyond her protection. The man is nearly twice the woman’s height, with a head of short, curly hair and wide eyes and red irises and skin as black as the night is dark. Both of his hands are balled into fists, and he holds them against his chest with the stiff posture and sharp expression of a bellicose ape.
“Isn’t she incredible?” Velen asks.
“Why didn’t they give her a face?”
“What?”
“The statue.”
Velen looks up at the stone woman. “Oh.” He smiles. “Cribdahl is a strange kingdom, my friend. As the fable goes, there is a realm outside of our own. In fact they call it The Outside. They believe that countless many gods exist out there, but they worship two in particular—the two you see there preserved in paint and stone. Mother, who breathed life into the lifeless. Father, who purged the Corrupted. They pierced the veil between this world and the next, and they wiped out the foreigners who had conquered the lands around Cribdahl. Father was a bold man who led the Cribdahlian men into war. Mother was a quiet woman who hid her face in public. What you see is them as they were to the people they served. Strange that no one finds their presence the least bit ironic.”
“Why’s it ironic?”
“These statues are avatars for the inbred hatred this kingdom has for foreign races.”
Carter looks around at all the pale faces hidden in the sea of darker ones. There are foreigners with skin the wrong color but eyes the right color, and there are foreigners with skin the right color but eyes the wrong color. Brown men. Beige women. Both sexes in shades of peach. These people mix amicably with the Cribdahlians, though they’re far outnumbered.
“They seem pretty open-minded at the moment,” Carter says.
“Yes, and there’s nothing inherently terrifying about a stick of dynamite near a box of matches.”
“I just think these Cribdahlians might be different.” Carter sweeps his hand through the air. “I know how much they hate foreigners in general. They’ve been treating me and Tabytha like shit from the moment we got here. But—”
“You have no idea how much these people hate foreigners, Carter.” Velen turns to him, and he’s not smiling, and he’s not wearing that condescending look he has so mastered. “You know that they hate foreigners,” he continues, “And that’s all you know. This is a bloody place my friend—pay no mind to the few clean spots.”
Carter looks around, and for the first time he reads contempt in the golden eyes of the pure-blooded Cribdahlians. He studies them for a long while, and he watches the way they speak, and the way they walk, and the way they keep their shoulders up, and he says, “Well. What’d you mean before? When you said ‘isn’t she incredible’? I guess you weren’t talking about the statue.”
Velen points into the crowd.
A circle of people has gathered before the statues, and an old man named Patriarch Newal, whose face is a wad of folds and wrinkles, stands at the center of the group dressed like a pope from an alternate reality. He wears a bilta that drapes his body all silken and soft and as white as mountain snow, and gold stitches line the sleeves and hem of his hood, and flattened jewels have been sewn in across his chest, and he holds a scepter with gemstones lining the shaft and a ball of emerald at the top with an iris carved into the front. Armed soldiers in dark attire and shining chestpieces flank him at both sides.
A group of nobles has stepped from the crowd to speak directly with this man, and at the head of these adulators is none other than Tabytha.
“I was talking about her,” Velen says.
She holds in her small hands a goblet of some bright green liquid. She sips from it slowly, and then she says something to the old man.
“You can hear her from here?” Carter asks.
Velen nods. “Loud and clear. She’s amazing when she gets started. You should hear her go.”