
With the sun at their backs, the statues look like shadow gods summoned out of nothing to pass judgment on the Patriarch’s parade. Their shadows stretch against the barge and all the people on it, false figures with exaggerated limbs, stretched necks and oblong heads enshrouding the celebrators as they mill about. The Patriarch stands before the statues flanked by Tab and Cart and their mustachioed friend, Nairoth. These four are backed by guardsmen in dark clothes and metal chestplates, and they are encircled by an ever-growing team of adulators who hang on Tab’s every word.
She has been rambling for a while now, espousing questionable philosophies and recounting tales and parables too numerous to be made up on the spot. She continues, and Roth looks at her sideways, fingering his mustache every so often. Cart only stands there. Silent. Looking at the ground.
Mer watches with a smile.
“Poor kid,” she mutters, shaking her head. Her curly bangs bounce gently and fall still. “I hope at least for your sake the sex is pretty good.”
Then a woman knocks into her from behind, throwing her into someone else. Mer apologizes to the man she bumped into, and the woman who hit her runs off before she can even get a good look at her.
The roof of this barge started off manageable enough, but now, with Tab reeling people in with her manic behavior—flipping from the impassioned gesticulations of a dictator to the reserved gestures of a minister—the crowd is reaching concert hall levels of crowded.
Mer stands amongst the worshipers, watching Tab’s hand-waves and proclamations with a narrow grin. Then another person walks by and knocks her, this time from the front. She takes a few steps back and bumps into something and turns to see one of the long tables lined up near the far guardrail. Trays of food and jugs of drink are arranged across the tables, colorful like candies in the sleepy light of the setting sun.
“When the hell did I get pushed this far out?” she mumbles to herself.
“Excuse me?”
She sees a man standing at her side, an emerald goblet in one hand and a jug of red juice in another. As he pours his cup, his eyes lock on her—but it’s not her eyes he’s looking at.
Mer had objected to the outfit earlier this morning, when the Patriarch offered it to her. He stood in her room with it hanging over his arm—a sleeveless white shirt with a deep v-neck, and a short red skirt.
“You’re an artistically put together woman, Mother,” he had said to her, “but you look like one of our people.” He was peering through the slits of his eyelids as if that would hide the intent of his gaze. “And an unknown Cribdahlian woman must not be seen in common clothes at the parade. She would be presumed my concubine.” He paused. “Not that it would bother me.” A smile crept across his face, though he barely showed his teeth. Perhaps he thought keeping his mouth nearly closed would ease the awkwardness. But he was wrong.
The man before Mer just now seems less interested in masking what he’s after. Lifting a hand to her chest to block his view, she says, “I was just talking to myself. That’s all.”
She wants to turn away, but he sets the jug down and takes her by the arm. Cold, moist fingers against her flesh. The urge to snap his wrist bubbles up inside her, and then passes. She looks at him. “Yes?”
“Oh, pardon my rudeness, ma’am, I just didn’t know what to call you by. I’ve never seen you at a Cribdahlian event before. Are you a visitor, or?” He studies her eyes—hazel like the very sun above, though she never corrects anyone for thinking they’re gold—and he looks at the mess of curls falling off of her head. “A girl of this very kingdom, eh? Who’d you come here with?”
She supposes the man is vaguely attractive. He’s quite lanky, with a young face, but a beard that makes him look like he’s trying to appear older. On his head, he wears a gold turban with embroidered flowers that would look silly enough without him wearing a matching robe.
Yes, she thinks, vaguely attractive.
She smiles.
The man smiles back and says, “What’s so funny?” but she only shakes her head. He holds a glass out for her to take, and after giving it a suspicious look, she grabs it but doesn’t drink. “Listen,” he begins, “this place is a mess. I happen to know the Patriarch very closely, and he’s given me a private room.” He is leaning closer now, the way a salesman does when he has a special deal just for you. “Why don’t we head down there and get to know each—”
Mer stumbles forward with a sudden jerk and splashes the front of his robe.
First she looks at the big red spot over his crotch, and then she looks up at him with widened eyes. “I am so sorry,” she says slowly. “I…” She turns to see who it was that bumped her, and there stands one of the Patriarch’s guards. He wears leather armor dyed blue—a chestpiece, thighguards, a helmet and even gloves. His left hand is resting on the grip of his sword, which sits in a blue sheath on his hip. Mer has seen him in uniform before, but never this close, and never in the surreal light of the falling sun.
“You should watch where the hell you’re going,” the bearded man says through clenched teeth.
The guard gives him a cold look, his bright blue eyes fixed on the man’s face.
“A foreigner?” he says. “Where are you from?”
But the guard doesn’t answer.
“What the hell is a foreign guard doing here?”
The guard walks on, pushing through the crowd and leaving them behind in an instant. As he bumps into others, they look up at this tall, powerful figure, their eyes rolling along in their skulls to follow him as he leaves, and their brows up, and their chins up as well.
“That bastard,” the man says as he watches him go. “I’ll have the Patriarch cut him down to size. One head length should be short enough.”
Mer rolls her eyes.
“That’s a different kind of foreigner,” he says, looking back at her. “Nothing like me. He’s an inbred. People from the north keep the love in the family. I’m sure it makes for romantic relationships, but the offspring…” he points his thumb over his shoulder. “Big and dumb.”
“At least they don’t look too bad,” Mer says.
He grins. “What was your name again, sweetheart? Pardon my uh… appearance—” he gestures with his hands down at his crotch “—but once we’re down in my room, I can find a nice change of clothes.”
“I bet you can.” Mer’s voice is flat as she says this. She puts the cup down on the table. “My name is Pemmer.” She gives him a polite nod and says, “And for some reason, I think I might prefer the inbred.”
He says nothing to that—only scrunches up his brow. Then he watches her as she pushes past him to follow the inbred into the throngs of people.
“Wait for me,” she calls after the guard.