
Present Time

“Where is Ank, anyway?” Mer asks Erv. They have stopped on the first landing of the stairs, where the window is. Erv is looking out at some celebrators standing on a large circular building who have cleared the center for two dueling swordsmen. Mer watches with him. Tiny figures in the sunlight circling slowly like birds, their blades readied, seeking an opening. “Erv? Any idea where he is?”
He shrugs.
“Well, I should go look for him,” she says.
She turns to go back down the stairs, but before she leaves Erv says, “Wait a minute.”
Mer looks at him.
Still looking outside, he speaks in a soft, even voice. “I know how you feel about raiding cities, Mer—”
“Then you know you shouldn’t ask,” she says, cutting him off.
He sighs, letting his head lower. “But I have to. I want you to lead the raid on Corver. It’s the last place Roth is. It’s the last one we’ll ever do.”
She holds her hands open and away from herself. “I don’t know what you expect, Erv.” She shakes her head. “You know I want to bring Roth back. You know I won’t kill all the infected.”
“Yes you will.” Erv looks at her. He isn’t angry, but that persistent smile from before is long gone.
“And why would I? Because you say so?”
“No.” He pauses here to sigh. “Because I’m bringing Roth back myself.”
Mer narrows her eyes at him.
Erv folds his arms across his chest. “I’ve decided Ank and I will stay at the palace to bring down Tab, Cart and Roth’s two nodes. With my affinity, I can keep them under control once they’re in the carriage. With your affinity, you can track down any infected who try to escape the city.”
As he speaks these words, the look of suspicion falls from her face, replaced by hopeful eyes and a tentative little smile. 
“You mean we’re taking Nairoth home safe—”
“You’ll do the raid,” he goes on. “You’ll finish things off yourself, and—”
He doesn’t get to finish his sentence before she throws her arms around his neck and hugs him again. She says so many beautiful words to him, and because her face is pressed against him nearly all of them are muffled.
“Does Ank know?” she asks, still embracing him.
“Not yet,” Erv says with a laugh in his voice. “You should go find him. And let’s hope he doesn’t have the same reaction when he finds out.”